---
title: Literature Review: Gas Stoves and the Environment
---

## Overview

This is a literature review of a 2020 [study](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0269749119376717?via%3Dihub#bib34) done on urban tree death in Chelsea, Massachusetts. The review is split into three sections, each meant for a specific audience (the general public, policymakers, and skeptics).

### The True Price of Natural Gas Goes Beyond our Utility Bills   

#### General Adult Public

Urban street trees improve public health and promote physical activity outdoors, but a recent study shows our reliance on natural gas is killing them.  
   
In a paper published in 2020, a team of researchers in the densely populated city of Chelsea, Massachusetts collected data from over 150 trees to quantify how harmful natural gas is to street trees. The city has been awarded by the Arbor Day Foundation for planting and monitoring around 4,000 trees in its parks and streets. It also happens to sit on top of one of the oldest natural gas distribution systems in the United States, making it the optimal location for this study.

In addition to taking care of these trees, the city contracts arborists to assess their health based on a list of features. Trunk condition, root health, foliage, pests, and branch structure are all given one of six ratings: dead, critical, poor, fair, good, very good, and excellent.

To avoid inaccurate results, the researchers chose not to analyze trees near industrial areas that could expose nearby vegetation to potentially harmful gases and chemicals besides methane. Instead, they decided to focus on trees grown in the commercial and residential sectors of the city. Selected trees were then split into two groups, one for healthy trees and another for those that were either dead or close to dying based on their ratings. Dead trees were removed from the group if they exhibited any signs of human-caused damage, vandalism, or a cause of death that was not related to gas. 

Methane and oxygen levels were tested in the soil surrounding each tree. These measurements were then used to form a model illustrating the relationship between gas leaks and tree death.

The same researchers that initiated this study also investigated the potential impact of ambient methane on tree health in the past, but found no connection between the two. However their results showed something completely different this time. The average dead or dying tree had 30 times the odds of being exposed to methane via soil relative to a healthy tree. Several were even 200 times more likely to be exposed.

Of the 84 dead trees, 20 of them were grown in soil where methane was present, and only one of the 97 healthy trees was grown in a similar environment. Additionally, oxygen levels in the soil beneath the dead trees were significantly lower than the levels found near the healthy trees.

It may seem unnecessary for urban trees to grow in oxygenated soil since they themselves create oxygen, but there is a lot more to it than that. After trees produce their own starch, they need to consume oxygen around their roots and branches in order to use it as energy. Reducing the concentration of oxygen in the soil beneath a tree decreases its capacity to respire and grow.  

The reaction to this study has been less energetic than the researchers may have hoped, likely due to the small sample size that they worked with. While the study is lacking in terms of scale, the results align with previous studies done on the presence of methane in unhealthy soil. 

Urban tree death is both increasing and expensive. Every year, Chelsea spends almost 50,000 dollars on tree removals and an additional 500 dollars per tree that is replanted. Not all of these trees are dying because of methane, but this study has shown that it is one of the possible contributors to the problem and hints at a solution. 

Cast-iron, bare steel and other leak-prone materials make up over 11 percent of the gas distribution system in Massachusetts. In 2013, there were over 3,000 reported leaks across 785 miles of surveyed road in Boston. Repairs to these pipes might fix things temporarily, but as they continue to corrode these leaks will become more frequent and more severe.

### Natural Gas and the Decline of Urban Tree Coverage 

#### Policymakers 

Street trees that are grown above leaky gas pipes are more likely to die, a study finds, and in Massachusetts this has serious financial and public health implications. 

The 2020 [study](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0269749119376717?via%3Dihub#bib34) done in Chelsea, Massachusetts quantified the relationship between natural gas and tree health using soil data collected from 181 trees across the city. Trees selected by the researchers were required to fit into one of two groups, the first being dead and near death and the other being healthy. Arborists determined the health of each tree through the visual assessment of features such as trunk condition, root health, branch structure, and pest presence. All of these features were rated individually, and the most commonly assigned rating would define the general health of a tree. A tree could be categorized as dead, critical, poor, fair, good, very good, or excellent. Healthy trees were ones that earned a rating of “good” or higher, and dead trees were those classified as “dead”.

In order to reduce the influence of contaminants other than methane, researchers chose to remove trees in industrial areas from the study. Additionally, trees in the dead group were removed if they showed signs of physical damage caused by humans or factors unrelated to natural gas. 

After narrowing down their sample size, the researchers took multiple samples from the soil beneath each tree. Four equally spaced holes were made around the base of a tree before a device was immediately placed inside of them to measure the concentration of methane. Four more holes were then drilled to measure oxygen concentrations. If there was a detectable level of methane in the soil, the tree growing there would be labeled as exposed, otherwise it would be considered unexposed. The average value of each set of holes was calculated for every tree, and the individual averages were used to find the mean methane and oxygen levels of the two groups. 

A series of tests and statistical models based on the groups revealed that 20 out of the 84 dead trees grew in soil with detectable levels of methane. Of the 97 healthy trees, only one was exposed to methane. The soil around healthy trees also displayed much higher oxygen concentrations than the soil beneath dead trees. In short, dead trees were 30 times more likely to be exposed to methane than healthy trees.

Other studies related to the impact of methane in soil have come to similar conclusions. Methane displaces oxygen, which is necessary for tree respiration and growth.

Location data pointed out that the highest methane concentrations were found in the samples closest to the streets where many of the city’s natural gas pipelines are installed. Leaky pipes are nothing new to cities in Massachusetts, as it has one of the oldest natural gas distribution systems in the United States. In Boston alone, there were over 3,000 leaks reported in 2013\. Chelsea encourages its citizens to report leaks to the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities, but the current report criteria does not include the potential climate and urban vegetation impacts of gas leaks. Unless there is a risk of explosion, the city will not repair a reported gas pipe.

The city of Chelsea spends close to 50,000 dollars annually on removing dead trees, and 500 more dollars every time one is replanted — money that could be spent on addressing the toxic lead paint chipping off the Tobin Bridge. Urban tree death is costly, and this study sheds light on the incompatibility of natural gas dependence and healthy urban vegetation.     

### What is Killing all the Street Trees? 

### Climate Skeptics

A common misconception surrounding trees in urban areas is that they are mere aesthetic additions, however it has been proven that they provide public health benefits as well. Despite how much it contributes to well-being, urban tree coverage has been declining in recent years, and much of this is due to rising tree deaths. Previous studies that intended to draw a connection between urban tree health and ambient methane have come up short, but new evidence suggests that methane present in soil can increase a tree’s odds of death.

In a [paper](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0269749119376717?via%3Dihub#bib2) published in 2020, researchers in the city of Chelsea, Massachusetts collected data from 181 trees to quantify how harmful natural gas is to urban vegetation. The city manages nearly 4,000 trees and also happens to use one of the oldest natural gas distribution systems in the United States. Older gas pipelines are often composed of materials that are more prone to leaking such as cast iron, wrought iron and bare steel, which make up over 11 percent of the pipe network in Massachusetts. In 2013, over 3,000 gas leaks were reported throughout Boston, a city less than five miles away from the location of the study.

Urban tree death is a concerning issue in Chelsea, and certainly not a cheap one. The city spends over 50,000 dollars a year on removing dead trees from its parks and streets. It is reasonable to speculate that the trees are dying from human caused physical damage or some toxic chemical, and the researchers account for these outside factors in their study. Any tree showing signs of damage from causes unrelated to natural gas was removed from their sample. Trees were selected from residential and commercial areas to further reduce the influence of gases and toxins present in the soil near industrial complexes.

Selected trees were then split into two groups, one for healthy trees and another for dead and nearly dead trees. Arborists determined the health of each tree through the visual assessment of features such as trunk condition, root health, branch structure, and pest presence. All of these features were rated individually, and the most commonly assigned rating would define the general health of a tree. According to the International Society of Arboriculture, a tree can be categorized as dead, critical, poor, fair, good, very good, or excellent. Healthy trees in this study were ones that earned a rating of “good” or higher.

Methane and oxygen levels were tested in the soil surrounding each tree using a multi-gas detector. Four equally spaced holes were made around the base of a tree before the device was immediately placed inside of them to measure the concentration of methane. Four more holes were then drilled to measure oxygen concentrations. If there was a detectable level of methane in the soil, the tree growing there would be labeled as exposed, otherwise it would be considered unexposed. The average value of each set of holes was calculated for every tree, and the individual averages were used to find the mean methane and oxygen levels of the two groups. 

A linear regression model adjusted for differences in tree location and health was used to evaluate the displacement of oxygen within soil by methane. Similar to other studies done on the relationship between methane and oxygen concentrations in soil, this study found that oxygen levels were significantly lower next to holes where methane was present. Like humans, trees actually need to absorb oxygen through respiration — despite the fact that they produce oxygen, trees cannot make use of it because they release it into the air instead of the soil. If a tree is unable to respire through its roots at a normal rate, its growth and ability to fight off fungal diseases are greatly reduced. 

Additional calculations revealed that dead trees were on average 30 times more likely to be exposed to methane than healthy trees. The researchers found 20 out of the 84 dead trees grew in soil with detectable levels of methane. By contrast, only one of the 97 healthy trees was exposed to the gas. Location data also verified that the highest methane concentrations were found in the samples closest to the streets where many of the city’s natural gas pipelines are installed.

Methane itself may not kill trees directly, but it can create an environment that makes it easier for pests and disease to do so. Natural gas is still the standard for cheap energy in many areas, but gaining a better understanding of its effects on both humans and vegetation can help fix poorly implemented infrastructure and keep our cities healthy.

