---
title: "Case Study: Coffee in Vietnam"
---

This paper was taken from an agricultural economics course that I took during my junior year at UMD. We were given the task of analyzing the environmental footprint of commercial agriculture through specific case studies. I chose to write about the coffee industry in Vietnam, as I am particularly interested in coffee brewing.

## Introduction

No matter where you are in the world, one thing appears to stay the same: high demand for coffee products. In 2022, coffee was the most consumed beverage in the United States, surpassing tap and bottled water[^1]. That same year, members of the European Union (EU) imported over 45 million 60 kilogram bags of coffee[^2]. Vietnam plays a key role in meeting global demand; in fact, it is the second largest exporter of coffee in the world after Brazil, accounting for 17.6% of total output[^3]. With an estimated export value of $4.24 billion in 2023, coffee is undoubtedly one of the most important agricultural commodities in the country[^4]. The industry involves some 600,000 smallholders in addition to hundreds of traders and exporters of varying sizes[^5]. Most of the coffee grown in Vietnam is of the Robusta variety, which is easier to grow than Arabica and yields more fruit, but generally sells for lower prices. The difference in price is not much of an issue though as the country has established itself as a supplier of cheap green coffee and instant coffee, not high quality Arabica. When it comes to growing Robusta, no other producer in the world cultivates more than Vietnam – in 2023, Brazil produced 22.8 million bags to Vietnam’s 28.7 million bags[^6]. About 40% of all the coffee grown in Vietnam comes from the Dak Lak Province in the Central Highlands, where over 611,500 hectares are used for coffee plantings[^7]. The region’s altitude, temperature, soil composition, and rainfall patterns are all ideal for Robusta production. Irrigation is necessary outside of the wet season, and the water resources for it come from man-made reservoirs, wells, and natural sources. The Central Highlands is the second poorest region in Vietnam, and has a population of 5.7 million people – over 40% of the population earns an income from coffee production[^8].     

## Environmental Risks

While the rapid expansion of the coffee industry from the mid-1980s to 2000 was a success in terms of poverty reduction, it was not as successful in preserving the natural environment of the Central Highlands. During this time period, government action prioritized agricultural growth over environmental protection, and indirectly encouraged farmers to exploit the natural resources of the Highlands – forest cover fell from 14.3 million hectares in 1943 to 10.88 million hectares in 1999[^9]. As a result, many stakeholders in the region are now vulnerable to major environmental risks.

Small-scale farmers should be most concerned about aging coffee tree stocks and increasing production on unsuitable land. The excessive use of agricultural inputs like fertilizer has made the soil more hospitable for nematodes that reduce the fertility and productivity of mature trees, and inhibit the growth of young, shallow-rooted trees. Since many small-scale farmers lack the financial resources to purchase seedlings and replace their tree stocks, their margins on coffee are likely to decline in the near future if nothing is done to slow the pace of soil degradation. Additionally, monocropping is a common practice among coffee farmers in the Highlands, which lowers their income diversification and can threaten their livelihoods during an unproductive growing season[^10]. The consequences of monocropping were exemplified during the 2016 drought when over 40,000 hectares of coffee plantation were lost[^11]. Low incomes keep small-scale farmers in a vicious cycle because the quality and quantity of coffee they can produce is limited by their capacity to invest[^12]. 

Of course, exporters should be concerned about declining yields too, but the more important issue for them has to do with forest encroachment driven by agricultural extensification. The recently proposed European Deforestation Regulation (EUDR) will ban the import of commodities linked to deforestation; unfortunately, exporters in Vietnam will likely fail to meet these standards for reasons outside of their control. Currently, farmers in the Highlands and exporters do not work directly with each other, and often need an intermediary to handle their exchanges. This, combined with the absence of a legitimate traceability scheme for coffee, prevents exporters from verifying that their products do not contribute to deforestation. If nothing is done to fix this, exporters of coffee will lose access to their largest market: Europe. 

Dak Lak residents who are not part of the coffee value chain but live in close proximity to farms will be exposed to a number of health risks. The use of agrochemicals on coffee trees pollutes surface water, decreases water quality, and increases filtration or treatment costs. This is especially concerning for those who live in the Central Highlands because the area is already dealing with issues related to clean water and basic sanitation – a study from 2020 revealed that access to improved water sources and sanitation for ethnic minorities was the lowest in the Central Highlands[^13]. Increasing the accessibility of clean drinking water will likely be an uphill battle if farms continue to overuse pesticides and fertilizers.   

Non-governmental organizations focused on sustainable development should be most concerned with the effects of forest encroachment and agrochemical usage on the global environment. Presently, coffee farms in Dak Lak are carbon sources rather than carbon sinks because they reduce natural forest cover and harm soil quality. Furthermore, the production and consumption of fertilizers releases greenhouse gases that directly contribute to global warming. Although Robusta is a resilient crop, significant changes in ambient temperature or rainfall induced by climate change could threaten the productivity of coffee farms in the Central Highlands. According to current estimates, the amount of suitable land in the Central Highlands would be reduced by up to 36% under the low climate impact scenario and 83% under the high impact scenario[^14]. Global production for Robusta is expected to drop by 23.5% as well. A reduction in productivity may also encourage farmers to plant more on unsuitable land and inadvertently make the issue worse. Thus, emissions from coffee production should be prioritized because they can indirectly harm the livelihoods of farmers across the world.   

## Constraining Factors

One of the main reasons why the Vietnamese government put so much emphasis on growing the coffee industry in the 1980s is because it failed to collectivize agriculture beforehand. Consequently, very few cooperatives and farmer organizations exist in the Central Highlands, which makes it difficult for companies to do business directly with farmers or form relationships with them. Organizations like the Vietnam Coffee-Cocoa Association (VICOFA) aim to solve this issue, but they have little regulatory power and rely on voluntary membership[^15]. There is also a lack of proper soil and water testing facilities that would help local authorities track input use on farms. Low traceability combined with poor data collection weakens a government’s capacity to create and enforce well-informed regulations. For example, it is difficult to implement an incentive for efficient water usage because farmers in the Central Highlands generally do not record their water expenditures, and province-level authorities have not put monitoring systems in place. On the other hand, there are economic incentives for environmentally degrading practices. Deforestation and the exploitation of agrochemicals can greatly increase yields while keeping costs low in the short term. Their negative impacts on biodiversity, soil quality, and carbon sequestration are “hidden” costs. Since Vietnam is a provider of cheap Robusta coffee, there is little demand for more sustainably produced premium coffee, which can make farmers more averse to obtaining costly certifications or meeting environmental standards set by regulations. Lastly, government agencies are uncoordinated and oftentimes have limited shared interests; the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources promotes better water resource management, but the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development promotes increased access to irrigation, a practice that has depleted water tables in the Central Highlands.   

## Enabling Factors

Both the private and public sectors have expressed a willingness to mitigate the environmental impacts of agriculture and more specifically, coffee production in Dak Lak. In recent years, the government has mobilized resources to improve monitoring systems and raise awareness around the benefits of sustainable farming practices through the establishment of training programs. A wider knowledge base can encourage farmers to record their soil quality and water consumption, improving data collection. The coffee industry is also dominated by large corporate entities – like Nestle, Starbucks and Trung Nguyên – that could potentially finance replanting or training projects in Dak Lak, because well-managed, productive farms provide greater economic returns[^16]. Vietnam is in a favorable position, considering the availability of funding and political will, and further investment in farm education and infrastructure will allow the government to apply regulations more effectively.    

## Current Government Policy and Program Interventions

The Vietnam Coffee Coordination Board (VCCB), first established in 2013, is an active group of public and private sector representatives that assists the Minister in creating policies for the coffee industry[^17]. Part of the CCB’s purpose is to carry out research and make suggestions to improve the efficiency, and sustainability of production. So far, the CCB has collaborated with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development’s National Agricultural Extension Center (NAEC) to create a national curriculum for coffee farmers in Dak Lak. The National Sustainability Curriculum (NSC) for Arabica coffee in Vietnam provides information on better practices that will help farmers meet international standards and grow higher quality coffee, ultimately improving their livelihoods[^18]. Overall, the CCB is important for the industry because it gives stakeholders from every part of the value chain a platform in decision making – a task the private sector cannot complete on its own.

Another program that will have more immediate environmental impacts is the National Action Plan for Vietnam to comply with the EUDR, which sets several goals for 2025 related to improving traceability and data collection[^19]. By 2025, the plan aims to develop a national database of crop production areas, and a monitoring and community patrol system for forests. The plan has also assigned tasks to private and public organizations, accelerating the implementation of these solutions. If executed properly, it will ensure that farmers in the Central Highlands can still sell their coffee to members of the EU in the future, solve the industry’s ongoing traceability issue, and slow forest encroachment.   

## Current and Potential Actions Taken by the Private Sector and Civil Society

From 2016 to 2018, the coffee corporation Lavazza partnered with the Sustainable Trade Initiative IDH and Olam to improve the climate resilience of Dak Lak coffee production under the ISLA program[^20]. During this period, Olam ran a number of pilot projects to train farmers, increase the efficiency of irrigation and fertilizer use, and provide shade trees. Around 1,245 farmers were reached under ISLA, but this number should grow in the near future as the IDH has created a new version of the program which will continue until 2025[^21]. Similarly, one of the world’s largest buyers of Vietnamese coffee, Jacobs Douwe Egberts (JDE), has partnered with USAID Green Invest Asia to assist nearly 14,000 Central Highlands farmers in optimizing fertilizer use, water management, and intercropping[^22]. Intercropping is especially important for its income diversification, pest control, and yield benefits[^23]. Studies have shown that drought-resilient coffee, pepper and durian crop mixes can produce 2.5 times the crop value without compromising coffee production or exploiting water resources[^24]. To improve data collection, JDE and other investors financed agronomists to keep track of over 4,500 farms in 2022\. Getting an accurate picture of coffee farming in the Central Highlands can help policymakers develop better regulations and assess the efficacy of private sector interventions.

To further improve environmental outcomes in the coffee industry, the private sector and civil society can mobilize resources towards increasing domestic consumption of coffee. Low domestic coffee consumption can be a limiting factor because a smaller consumer base reduces demand for sustainably produced coffee or better food safety standards. Additionally, the formation of more farmer organizations can make the implementation of peer-based monitoring systems more feasible for the government.  

## Takeaways

Something I found surprising is how uncoordinated the coffee value chain is in Vietnam. Considering the age and economic value of the industry, I figured that a well-functioning traceability scheme would have been developed by now. As a consumer of roasted coffee, I have seen many certification stickers on bags that require companies to verify the origin or quality of their product, which would imply that they work directly with farmers. This contributed to my preconception that a large proportion of exporters in Vietnam knew where exactly their coffee came from. Since most of the coffee that comes from Vietnam is in the form of instant coffee, I know that I am not part of the industry’s consumer base. That being said, if I do purchase instant coffee or coffee originating from Vietnam in the future, I will be more inclined to choose a product that is certified as sustainable now that I know the environmental impacts of production.  

I also learned that the feasibility of implementing environmental protection policies is highly dependent on existing infrastructure and available resources. In Vietnam’s case, the lack of soil testing and water monitoring infrastructure makes it very difficult, and expensive, to enforce regulations that limit input use on coffee farms. Vietnam is fortunate in the sense that it has strong relationships with large corporations that can help the government finance the construction of these facilities. Other low-income countries that attract less foreign investment, potentially due to political instability, might avoid environmental protection policies because they do not have immediate economic benefits. This almost reflects what occurred in Vietnam during the 1980s; policies were geared towards poverty reduction, investments in rural infrastructure, and support for internal migration. Environmental protection is beneficial in the long run, but it is hard to assign monetary values to the environment. Conversely, it is easy to measure the monetary benefits of poverty reduction and rural development.

Now that Vietnam has managed to make a multi-billion dollar industry out of coffee, and significantly reduce poverty from what it was prior to the 1980s, promoting agricultural growth should not have to conflict with environmental protection. Coffee production is at a point where further growth will do more harm than good if nothing is done to mitigate its impacts. Under a purely growth-oriented approach, deforestation, soil degradation, and water scarcity will worsen, reducing overall productivity. Furthermore, when the land inevitably becomes too degraded to sustain current levels of coffee production, restoration costs will be even greater. Environmental protection policies, like regulations on water use for irrigation, can reduce the negative ecological impacts of coffee farming while improving yields and lowering input costs for farmers.  
Agricultural growth and environmental protection do not have to work against one another because there are protective practices that can help grow agriculture.  

## Mini Case Study: Côte d’Ivoire

Côte d’Ivoire is the world’s largest producer of cocoa and responsible for almost 45% of global production[^25]. In 2022, cocoa bean exports amounted to $3.33 billion[^26]. The Ivorian economy also happens to be highly dependent on the commodity; cocoa contributes to 15% of the national GDP and over 40% of export earnings[^27]. Similar to Vietnam, cocoa production involves about 600,000 farmers, but the industry as a whole employs close to 6 million people[^28]. It is estimated that up to 80% of farmers in Côte d’Ivoire rely on cocoa as a source of income[^29]. 

Although it is economically beneficial for millions of Ivorians, cocoa production has severe environmental impacts. Deforestation from farm expansion has resulted in a forest cover loss of 75%, with most of this loss occurring in the last 30 years[^30]. Some experts even believe that the country will lose all of its forest cover by 2034 if current rates persist[^31]. Farmers often choose to cut down forests because it can have short term productivity benefits, and provide an additional source of income through logging. They also lack alternative options because the accessibility of financing and farmer education is low in Côte d’Ivoire. Currently, farmers and exporters do not work together directly, which makes it hard to trace cocoa as it passes through the value chain. As seen in Vietnam, low traceability limits a government’s ability to design and implement environmental protection policies; satellite imagery has shown that 14% of Côte d’Ivoire’s protected forests is being used for cocoa production, likely due to weak enforcement[^32]. 

Deforestation will likely end up harming the livelihoods of smallholders in the future because it reduces the suitability of land for cocoa production. Cocoa plants actually benefit from shading, which is lost when forest cover is eliminated or when a monocrop system is being used. In addition, many smallholders cannot afford to restore degraded soils or purchase necessary inputs like fertilizer, so their yields and incomes will be vulnerable to extreme declines in the future. Indigenous groups also face the risk of being displaced due to deforestation. 

In 2022, the government, in collaboration with the IDH, committed to the Cocoa and Forests Initiative Joint Framework for Action[^33]. The main objectives of the plan are to promote reforestation through the Ministry of Water and Forests (MINEF), and control the circulation of forest products to discourage illegal logging. So far, the MINEF has been able to reforest 52,174 hectares of land alongside the private sector, which has reforested close to 35,000 hectares and trained 257,425 farmers in agroforestry. What makes this measure important is that it targets the root cause of deforestation in cocoa production: poverty. Teaching farmers how to increase yields in a sustainable way will help prevent them from resorting to deforestation and illegal logging for additional income. Reforestation also improves the carbon sequestration capacity of rural areas, which can mitigate the future effects of climate change on cocoa farming.  

## Sources

1. NCA. (2022). *Coffee Consumption Hits Two-Decade High.* National Coffee Association. [https://www.ncausa.org/Newsroom/Coffee-consumption-hits-two-decade-high2022-NCDT](https://www.ncausa.org/Newsroom/Coffee-consumption-hits-two-decade-high2022-NCDT)    
2. USDA. (2023). *Coffee: World Markets and Trade.* USDA Foreign Agricultural Service. [https://fas.usda.gov/data/commodities/coffee](https://fas.usda.gov/data/commodities/coffee)   
3. Scherr, S. J., Mankad, K., Jaffee, S., & Negra, C. (2015). *Steps toward green: Policy responses to the environmental footprint of commodity agriculture in East and Southeast Asia*. EcoAgriculture Partners.   
4. VCCB. (2022). *The Vietnam Coffee Coordination Board defines targets for 2023*. Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee. [https://daklak.gov.vn/web/english/-/the-vietnam-coffee-coordination-board-defines-targets-for-20-1](https://daklak.gov.vn/web/english/-/the-vietnam-coffee-coordination-board-defines-targets-for-20-1)    
5. MARD. (2024, February 17). *Vietnam’s coffee exports doubled in January 2024*. Cổng thông tin điện tử Bộ NN và PTNT. [https://www.mard.gov.vn/en/Pages/vietnam-s-coffee-exports-doubled-in-january-2024.aspx](https://www.mard.gov.vn/en/Pages/vietnam-s-coffee-exports-doubled-in-january-2024.aspx) 
6. USDA. (2023, May 24). *Coffee Annual*. United States Department of Agriculture Foreign Agricultural Service. [https://apps.fas.usda.gov/newgainapi/api/Report/DownloadReportByFileName?fileName=Coffee+Annual\_Hanoi\_Vietnam\_VM2023-0025.pdf](https://apps.fas.usda.gov/newgainapi/api/Report/DownloadReportByFileName?fileName=Coffee+Annual_Hanoi_Vietnam_VM2023-0025.pdf)  
7. USDA. (2023, June 6). *Coffee Annual*. United States Department of Agriculture Foreign Agricultural Service. [https://apps.fas.usda.gov/newgainapi/api/Report/DownloadReportByFileName?fileName=Coffee%20Annual\_Brasilia\_Brazil\_BR2023-0011.pdf](https://apps.fas.usda.gov/newgainapi/api/Report/DownloadReportByFileName?fileName=Coffee%20Annual_Brasilia_Brazil_BR2023-0011.pdf)   
8. Nguyen, P. (2023, November 17). *Vietnam coffee market: Consumers, challenges, and prospects*. Vietnam Briefing News. [https://www.vietnam-briefing.com/news/vietnam-coffee-market-a-deep-dive-into-its-consumers-challenges-and-prospects.html/](https://www.vietnam-briefing.com/news/vietnam-coffee-market-a-deep-dive-into-its-consumers-challenges-and-prospects.html/)  
9. Catherine Beal. (2020, July 3). *Background on coffee in Vietnam*. Catherine Beal. [https://www.plantagbiosciences.org/people/catherine-beal/2020/07/03/background-on-coffee-in-vietnam/](https://www.plantagbiosciences.org/people/catherine-beal/2020/07/03/background-on-coffee-in-vietnam/)  
10. IUCN. (2020, August 3). *Transforming Coffee and water use in the Central Highlands of Vietnam: Case study from Dak Lak province*. [https://www.iucn.org/news/viet-nam/202008/transforming-coffee-and-water-use-central-highlands-vietnam-case-study-dak-lak-province](https://www.iucn.org/news/viet-nam/202008/transforming-coffee-and-water-use-central-highlands-vietnam-case-study-dak-lak-province)   
11. D’haeze, D. (2020). *Transforming Coffee and water use in the Central Highlands of Vietnam*. IUCN. [https://www.iucn.org/sites/default/files/content/documents/2020/200713\_bridge\_3s\_ch\_coffee\_revised\_clean-\_final2.pdf](https://www.iucn.org/sites/default/files/content/documents/2020/200713_bridge_3s_ch_coffee_revised_clean-_final2.pdf)  
12. UNEP. (2021, January 22). *Coffee, environmental degradation and smallholder livelihoods*. UNEP. [https://www.unep.org/resources/newsletter/coffee-environmental-degradation-and-smallholder-livelihoods](https://www.unep.org/resources/newsletter/coffee-environmental-degradation-and-smallholder-livelihoods)   
13. GCP. (2021). *National Sustainability Curriculum for Arabica in Vietnam set to boost quality and value*. Global Coffee Platform. [https://www.globalcoffeeplatform.org/latest/2021/national-sustainability-curriculum-for-arabica-in-vietnam-set-to-boost-quality-and-value/](https://www.globalcoffeeplatform.org/latest/2021/national-sustainability-curriculum-for-arabica-in-vietnam-set-to-boost-quality-and-value/)   
14. IDH. (2023, August). *National Action Plan for Vietnam coffee sector to comply with EU Deforestation Regulation (EUDR)*. [https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/uploaded/2023/08/EUDR-national-action-plan.pdf](https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/uploaded/2023/08/EUDR-national-action-plan.pdf)  
15. USAID. (2020, December 12). *Scaling up sustainable Robusta coffee production in Vietnam: reducing carbon footprints while improving farm profitability.* [https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/uploaded/2021/03/Scaling-up-Sustainable-Robusta-Coffee-Production-in-Vietnam-full-tech-report\_March-102021.pdf](https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/uploaded/2021/03/Scaling-up-Sustainable-Robusta-Coffee-Production-in-Vietnam-full-tech-report_March-102021.pdf)  
16. KIT. (2024, April 16). *Evaluation of the initiative for sustainable landscapes (ISLA) programme*. [https://www.kit.nl/institute/project/evaluation-of-the-initiative-for-sustainable-landscapes-isla-programme](https://www.kit.nl/institute/project/evaluation-of-the-initiative-for-sustainable-landscapes-isla-programme)  
17. IDH. (2016, November). *Improving Climate Change Resilience of Coffee Production in Dak Lak Province, Vietnam*. [https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/uploaded/2016/11/ISLA-factsheet-Olam-Lavazza-VN.pdf](https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/uploaded/2016/11/ISLA-factsheet-Olam-Lavazza-VN.pdf)  
18. Lan, L. (2023, December 12). *Are Vietnamese coffee farmers willing to pay for Weather Index Insurance?* International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction. [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212420923006659](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212420923006659)  
19. Summers, C. (2014, January 25). *How Vietnam became a coffee giant*. BBC News. [https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-25811724](https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-25811724)  
20. Huong, L. T. T. (2020, August 4). *Access to Improved Water Sources and Sanitation in Minority Ethnic People in Vietnam and Some Sociodemographic Associations: A 2019 National Survey*. NIH. [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7412927/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7412927/)  
21. Ghosal, A. (2024, March 26). *How EU deforestation laws are reordering the world of coffee*. AP News. [https://apnews.com/article/vietnam-coffee-deforestation-eu-20e3fac82a42beb38013980fa7a760e6](https://apnews.com/article/vietnam-coffee-deforestation-eu-20e3fac82a42beb38013980fa7a760e6)  
22. Le, Q. V., & Cowal, S. (2021, September 9). *A Study of Regenerative Farming Practices and Sustainable Coffee of Ethnic Minorities Farmers in the Central Highlands of Vietnam*. Frontiers. [https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2021.712733/full](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2021.712733/full)  
23. Mohler, C. (2022, February 7). *Guidelines for intercropping*. SARE. [https://www.sare.org/publications/crop-rotation-on-organic-farms/guidelines-for-intercropping/](https://www.sare.org/publications/crop-rotation-on-organic-farms/guidelines-for-intercropping/)  
24. USAID. (2020, March 30). *USAID Green Invest Asia partners with coffee corporate to boost sustainability in Vietnam: Program update: Asia regional*. Archive \- U.S. Agency for International Development. [https://2017-2020.usaid.gov/asia-regional/program-updates/mar-2020-usaid-green-invest-asia-partners-coffee-corporate-boost-sustainability-vietnam](https://2017-2020.usaid.gov/asia-regional/program-updates/mar-2020-usaid-green-invest-asia-partners-coffee-corporate-boost-sustainability-vietnam)  
25. Green Invest Asia. (2023, May 31). *USAID and coffee industry co-create Robusta carbon footprint baselines in Vietnam and Indonesia*. USAID. [https://www.climatelinks.org/green-invest-asia/usaid-and-coffee-industry-co-create-robusta-carbon-footprint-baselines-in-vietnam-and-indonesia/index.html](https://www.climatelinks.org/green-invest-asia/usaid-and-coffee-industry-co-create-robusta-carbon-footprint-baselines-in-vietnam-and-indonesia/index.html)   
26. Nguyen, T. H. M. (2021, September 29). *The environment impacts of coffee industry and environmental requirements for coffee enterprises in Vietnam*. Tạp chí Công Thương. [https://tapchicongthuong.vn/bai-viet/the-environment-impacts-of-coffee-industry-and-environmental-requirements-for-coffee-enterprises-in-vietnam-83841.htm](https://tapchicongthuong.vn/bai-viet/the-environment-impacts-of-coffee-industry-and-environmental-requirements-for-coffee-enterprises-in-vietnam-83841.htm)  
27. Gayle, D. (2023, May 22). *Cocoa planting is destroying protected forests in West Africa, study finds*. The Guardian. [https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/may/22/cocoa-planting-is-destroying-protected-forests-in-west-africa-study-finds](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/may/22/cocoa-planting-is-destroying-protected-forests-in-west-africa-study-finds)  
28. Ngari, A. (2022, May 31). *Shady cocoa farming at the root of Côte d’Ivoire’s deforestation: ISS Africa*. Institute for Security Studies. [https://issafrica.org/iss-today/shady-cocoa-farming-at-the-root-of-cote-divoires-deforestation](https://issafrica.org/iss-today/shady-cocoa-farming-at-the-root-of-cote-divoires-deforestation)  
29. IDH. (2023, September 21). *Côte d’Ivoire Cocoa and Forests Initiative 2022 Annual Report*. [https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/publication/cote-divoire-cocoa-forests-initiative-2022-annual-report/](https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/publication/cote-divoire-cocoa-forests-initiative-2022-annual-report/)  
30. Zon, H. (2022, November 13). *Cocoa farmers fear climate change lowering crop production*. AP News. [https://apnews.com/article/africa-business-west-ivory-coast-cocoa-farming-2ee8b03c12fb3c7112ac2902a0114466](https://apnews.com/article/africa-business-west-ivory-coast-cocoa-farming-2ee8b03c12fb3c7112ac2902a0114466)  
31. United Nations. (2022, May 17). *UNSDG | Sustainable Cocoa farming in Côte d’Ivoire: UN deputy chief notes significant progress and calls for greater international support*. United Nations. [https://unsdg.un.org/latest/stories/sustainable-cocoa-farming-cote-divoire-un-deputy-chief-notes-significant-progress](https://unsdg.un.org/latest/stories/sustainable-cocoa-farming-cote-divoire-un-deputy-chief-notes-significant-progress)  
32. Aboa, A. (2023, October 25). *Ivory Coast in fresh stand-off with cocoa buyers over Premium* . Reuters. [https://www.reuters.com/markets/commodities/ivory-coast-expects-25-drop-main-crop-cocoa-arrivals-ccc-director-2023-10-25/](https://www.reuters.com/markets/commodities/ivory-coast-expects-25-drop-main-crop-cocoa-arrivals-ccc-director-2023-10-25/)  
33. OEC. (2024, February). *Cocoa beans in Côte d’ivoire*. The Observatory of Economic Complexity. [https://oec.world/en/profile/bilateral-product/cocoa-beans/reporter/civ](https://oec.world/en/profile/bilateral-product/cocoa-beans/reporter/civ)  
34. Balineau, G. (2016, December). *Cocoa farmers’ agricultural practices and livelihoods in Côte d’Ivoire*. AFD. [https://www.afd.fr/en/ressources/cocoa-farmers-agricultural-practices-and-livelihoods-cote-divoire](https://www.afd.fr/en/ressources/cocoa-farmers-agricultural-practices-and-livelihoods-cote-divoire)  
35. Johnson, S. (2022, December 27). *How ivory coast is winning the fight to keep its children out of the cocoa fields*. The Guardian. [https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2022/dec/27/how-ivory-coast-is-winning-the-fight-to-keep-its-children-out-of-the-cocoa-fields](https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2022/dec/27/how-ivory-coast-is-winning-the-fight-to-keep-its-children-out-of-the-cocoa-fields) 

[^1]:  NCA. (2022). *Coffee Consumption Hits Two-Decade High.*
[^2]:  USDA. (2023). *Coffee: World Markets and Trade.*
[^3]:  Nguyen, T. H. M. (2021, September 29). *The environment impacts of coffee industry and environmental requirements for coffee enterprises in Vietnam*.
[^4]:  MARD. (2024, February 17). *Vietnam’s coffee exports doubled in January 2024*. 
[^5]:  Catherine Beal. (2020, July 3). *Background on coffee in Vietnam*.
[^6]:  USDA. (2023, June 6). *Coffee Annual*.
[^7]:  USDA. (2023, May 24). *Coffee Annual.*
[^8]:  IUCN. (2022, June 27). *Transforming Coffee and water use in the Central Highlands of Vietnam: Case study from Dak Lak province*. 
[^9]: Nguyen, T. H. M. (2021, September 29). *The environment impacts of coffee industry and environmental requirements for coffee enterprises in Vietnam.*
[^10]: Scherr, S. J., Mankad, K., Jaffee, S., & Negra, C. (2015). *Steps toward green: Policy responses to the environmental footprint of commodity agriculture in East and Southeast Asia.*
[^11]: IUCN. (2020, August 3). *Transforming Coffee and water use in the Central Highlands of Vietnam: Case study from Dak Lak province.* 
[^12]: UNEP. (2021, January 22). *Coffee, environmental degradation and smallholder livelihoods.*
[^13]: Huong, L. T. T. (2020, August 4). *Access to Improved Water Sources and Sanitation in Minority Ethnic People in Vietnam and Some Sociodemographic Associations: A 2019 National Survey.*
[^14]: Lan, L. (2023, December 12). *Are Vietnamese coffee farmers willing to pay for Weather Index Insurance?*
[^15]: Scherr, S. J., Mankad, K., Jaffee, S., & Negra, C. (2015). *Steps toward green: Policy responses to the environmental footprint of commodity agriculture in East and Southeast Asia.*
[^16]: Nguyen, P. (2023, November 17). *Vietnam coffee market: Consumers, challenges, and prospects.*
[^17]: Scherr, S. J., Mankad, K., Jaffee, S., & Negra, C. (2015). *Steps toward green: Policy responses to the environmental footprint of commodity agriculture in East and Southeast Asia.*
[^18]: GCP. (2021). *National Sustainability Curriculum for Arabica in Vietnam set to boost quality and value.*
[^19]: IDH. (2023, August). *National Action Plan for Vietnam coffee sector to comply with EU Deforestation Regulation (EUDR).* 
[^20]: IDH. (2016, November). *Improving Climate Change Resilience of Coffee Production in Dak Lak Province, Vietnam.* 
[^21]: KIT. (2024, April 16). *Evaluation of the initiative for sustainable landscapes (ISLA) programme.* 
[^22]: USAID. (2020, December 12). *Scaling up sustainable Robusta coffee production in Vietnam: reducing carbon footprints while improving farm profitability.* 
[^23]: Mohler, C. (2022, February 7). *Guidelines for intercropping.*
[^24]: IUCN. (2020, August 3). *Transforming Coffee and water use in the Central Highlands of Vietnam: Case study from Dak Lak province.* 
[^25]: Johnson, S. (2022, December 27). *How Ivory Coast is winning the fight to keep its children out of the cocoa fields.*
[^26]: OEC. (2024, February). *Cocoa beans in Côte d’ivoire.*
[^27]: IDH. (2023, September 21). *Côte d’Ivoire Cocoa and Forests Initiative 2022 Annual Report.* 
[^28]: Zon, H. (2022, November 13). *Cocoa farmers fear climate change lowering crop production.*
[^29]: United Nations. (2022, May 17). *UNSDG | Sustainable Cocoa farming in Côte d’Ivoire: UN deputy chief notes significant progress and calls for greater international support.*
[^30]: See 27\.
[^31]: Ngari, A. (2022, May 31). *Shady cocoa farming at the root of Côte d’Ivoire’s deforestation: ISS Africa.*
[^32]: Gayle, D. (2023, May 22). *Cocoa planting is destroying protected forests in West Africa, study finds.*
[^33]: IDH. (2023, September 21). *Côte d’Ivoire Cocoa and Forests Initiative 2022 Annual Report.* 
